NIRA v0.5 is a local-first assistant with visible offline status, local storage, and explicit side-effect approval.
The canonical runtime reports healthy deterministic-offline mode. Chat works without pretending that a local model is running.
The Operations Center reads the canonical runtime; its overview counts real roles, tools, workflows, conversations, messages, and loaded models.
The agent board shows sequential routing, specialist, planning, safety, execution, critic, and response activity plus completed handoffs.
Memory evidence is local and count-based. Conversation content is not exposed in this dashboard.
Workflows show registered templates and completed task-plan states from the last real request.
Model routing exposes aliases and cache limits while keeping the unavailable local-model state honest.
Tools and permissions show the real registry. Only read and NIRA-state access are allowed by default.
System Health shows live metrics and a privacy-safe contract without workspace paths, state directories, or session identifiers.
Conversation history is local and user-controlled: search, open, pin, rename, export, and confirmed deletion.
The first real tool inspects this repository while excluding virtual environments, dependencies, caches, and build output.
The second tool reads bounded workspace content and reports the applied size limit.
An attempted path escape is rejected without reading the outside file.
A coding plan reaches process execution and pauses. Denial is the safe default, stops the task, and is never auto-retried.
Permission evidence stores the tool, access class, verdict, timestamp, and reason—never the raw arguments.
A second verification is approved once. The narrow compile command runs through the same registry and permission boundary.
Returning to Workflows shows completed states from the real verification plan, separately from registered templates.
Release evidence: 51 tests, clean dependency and secret scans, and a v0.5 wheel verified outside the source tree.
Honest limitation: no real model profile, optional voice and PyQt outside core, and retrieval/accessibility evaluation still pending.